# 3.1 Overview of Installed Extensions

Azure Database for PostgreSQL flexible server allows you to extend the functionality of your database using extensions. Extensions bundle multiple related SQL objects into a single package that can be loaded or removed from your database with a single command. After being loaded into the database, extensions function like built-in features.  

## Installed Extensions

With the required extensions added to the _allowlist_, the extensions can be installed. To enable them, we run a [CREATE EXTENSION](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createextension.html) command for each in PostgreSQL.

`CREATE EXTENSION` loads a new extension into the database by running its script file. This script typically creates new SQL objects such as functions, data types, and schemas. An error is thrown if an extension of the same name already exists, so adding `IF NOT EXISTS` allows the command to execute without throwing an error if it is already installed.

The extensions are installed from the following sql code present in `scripts/sql/deploy-database-tables.sql` file which is run automatically during setup.

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line MD046 -->
```sql
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS azure_ai;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS vector;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pg_diskann;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS age;
```

**Azure AI**  

The Azure AI (`azure_ai`) extension transforms your database into an AI-powered platform. It lets you connect directly with Azure's AI services, such as Azure OpenAI and Azure Cognitive Services, from your PostgreSQL database and incorporate advanced functionalities like natural language processing, text analysis, and embedding generation into your database operations. This integration simplifies the development process, enabling seamless interaction with Azure's AI tools and enhancing your database with cutting-edge AI features.  

**pgvector**  

The pgvector (`vector`) extension adds advanced vector operations to your PostgreSQL database. It is designed to facilitate vector similarity searches by enabling the storage, indexing, and querying of vector data directly within PostgreSQL. This extension provides more complex and meaningful data retrieval based on vector similarity.

**DiskANN**  

The DiskANN (`pg_diskann`) extension adds support for using DiskANN for efficient vector indexing and searching. Once the extension is installed, you can create `diskann` indexes on table columns that contain vector data.

!!! tip "The DiskANN extension is dependent on the pgvector extension."
    Because `pg_diskann` has a dependency on the `vector` extension, you must first allow and create the `vector` extension in the same database. Alternatively, you can use the `CASCADE` clause in the above query, which will cause PostgreSQL to implicitly run `CREATE EXTENSION` on the extension's dependencies.

**AGE**  

The AGE (`age`) extension enables graph database capabilities within PostgreSQL. It allows you to store, query, and analyze graph data using the openCypher query language, making it possible to model complex relationships and perform advanced graph analytics directly in your database.
